**Laboratory of Stable Isotopes and Noble Gas NUCLEUS (Universidad de
Salamanca, Spain)**

The Laboratory of Stable Isotopes and Noble Gases was launched in 1991
and nowadays is one of the General Services of scientific research
support of the University of Salamanca, integrated in the so-called
NUCLEUS platform.

This General Service makes determinations of the isotopic ratios of
light elements Hydrogen (D/H), Carbon (<sup>13</sup>C/<sup>12</sup>C),
Nitrogen (<sup>15</sup>N/<sup>14</sup>N), Oxygen
(<sup>18</sup>O/<sup>16</sup>O) and Sulphur
(<sup>34</sup>S/<sup>32</sup>S), as well as noble gases Helium
(<sup>3</sup>He/<sup>4</sup>He), Neon (<sup>20</sup>Ne/<sup>22</sup>Ne,
<sup>21</sup>Ne/<sup>22</sup>Ne), Argon
(<sup>40</sup>Ar/<sup>36</sup>Ar, <sup>38</sup>Ar/<sup>36</sup>Ar),
Kripton (<sup>84</sup>Kr/<sup>36</sup>Ar) and Xenon
(<sup>129</sup>Xe/<sup>130</sup>Xe, <sup>130</sup>Xe/<sup>36</sup>Ar,
<sup>136</sup>Xe/<sup>132</sup>Xe, <sup>129</sup>Xe/<sup>132</sup>Xe) in
all types of materials: solid (rocks and minerals, organic substances,
...), liquids (water and its solutes, hydrocarbons,…) and gaseous. Its
use is also open to other public Institutions and private companies. It
maintains a high and solid scientific track record. At present, the
laboratory is directly involved in leading scientific projects with
national (CSIC) and international (UK, Japan) collaborators. It also
provides service to important national and international companies of
hydrocarbons and gas production.

In summary, the Lab’s equipment houses:

\- 7 mass spectrometers (4 dual inlet; 3 continuous flow), together with
diverse preparation systems, off-line and on-line including equilibrium
devices, Elemental Analyzers, Gas Chromatography, laser extraction
systems and several high vacuum extraction lines, able to handle a range
of materials for analysis.

Regarding Earth Sciences in general and Volcanology in particular, the
main prep systems utilized include both a conventional and a laser
fluorination line (δ<sup>18</sup>O determination in silicates); a D/H
line for hydrogen extraction out of hydrated minerals; a step-heating
device for the fractional extraction and purification of fluids (liquid,
gas) from fluid inclusions; facilities for both physical and chemical
extraction of Sulphur forms, and a vacuum extraction line to generate
the gas required for δ<sup>34</sup>S determination. Additionally, an
elemental analyzer equipped with pyrolysis capabilities is coupled to
one of the CF mass spectrometers. The CO<sub>2</sub> laser can be used
for in-situ analysis of δ<sup>18</sup>O, and the Nd:YAG laser for spot
determination of isotopic ratios in sulphides.

\- 1 CRDS for the determination of D/H and oxygen in liquids, and C in
CO<sub>2</sub> and CH<sub>4</sub>.

\- 1 Thermo-HELIX-SFT (single flight tube) ultra-high vacuum mass
spectrometer for the determination of isotopic ratios of noble gases
(He, Ne, Ar, Xe, Kr). A solid sample preparation device is connected
on-line to the mass spectrometer (laser and crushers), and an off-line
extraction line for noble gas extraction out of fluid (liquid and gas)
samples is available as well.

More details of the available equipment at:

https://nucleus.usal.es/en/isotopes/equipment
