**Geochronology and Isotope Geochemistry Facility-SGIker (Universidad
del Pais Vasco, Spain)**

The Facility carries out elemental and isotopic analyses of natural and
synthetic products for R+D+i activities in public and private
institutions. The Facility is equipped for:

*Analysis of radiogenic and stable isotopes:*

• Thermal ionization mass spectrometer (TIMS) Finnigan-Spectromat MAT262
RPQ+, with 8 Faraday cups equipped with 100 Gigaohms and 1 Teraohms
resistors, and 2 SEM.

• Multi collector, high-resolution inductively coupled mass spectrometer
(MC-ICP-MS) Neptune, with dry plasma and double desolvation (Apex+Spiro)
sample introduction system.

*Elemental analysis;*

• Inductively coupled plasma source atomic emission spectrometer
(ICP-AES) Optima 8300

• Quadrupole inductively coupled plasma source mass spectrometers
(Q-ICP-MS) XSeries 2 and iCAP Qc, with collision cell, FAST system for
sample uptake, gas dilution and ion exchange kits for speciation (As,
Se, Cr)

*Elemental and isotopic microanalysis;*

• UP213 (New Wave) laser ablation (LA) system for microanalysis of solid
samples

*Isotopic analyses of dissolved samples by TIMS and MC-ICP-MS;*

Specific protocols for geochemistry and geochronology.

Isotopic ratios measured for geochemical characterization:
<sup>87</sup>Sr/<sup>86</sup>Sr, δ<sup>88</sup>Sr
(<sup>88</sup>Sr/<sup>86</sup>Sr), Pb/Pb.

Isotopic ratios and element concentration for radiometric age
determinations of whole rock or mineral concentrates: Rb-Sr, Sm-Nd,
Lu-Hf.

*Isotopic microanalysis of solid samples;*

Laser ablation (LA) coupled to Q-ICP-MS and MC-ICP-MS for the analysis
of different isotopic systems, either for dating or geochemical
characterization purposes: U-Th-Pb, Hf/Hf, Sr/Sr, Li/Li, B/B, Fe/Fe.

*Elemental analyses; *

• Methods designed for multi-elemental analyses including REE and HFSE

• Appropriate CRMs from international suppliers (NIST, USGS, JSG, IRMM,
IAEA, ...) for a wide range of sample types

*Analysis in dissolution by ICP-OES and Q-ICP-MS;*

• Sample preparation is adapted to each requirement: fusion-dissolution
or different acid digestions

• Calibration protocols adapted to different sample types

*Microanalysis of solid samples by LA-Q-ICP-MS; *

• Analyses on petrographic thin sections or epoxy mounts

• Simultaneous analysis of a large range of trace elements

Contact:

Scientific-Technical Head of the Facility:

Dr. José Ignacio Gil Ibarguchi (<josei.gil@ehu.es>)

Technical staff:

Elemental and isotopic analysis in solution and solid samples (ICP-OES,
Q-ICP-MS, MC-ICP-MS, LA):

Dr. Sonia García deMadinabeitia (sonia.gdm@ehu.es)

Isotopic analysis in solution by TIMS and MC-ICP-MS:

Dr. Javier Rodríguez Aller (javier.rodrigueza@ehu.eus)

Internet: http://www.ehu.es/SGIker/es/ibercron
