**Laboratory of X-ray Diffraction (CSIC-ICTJA, Spain)**

The X-ray Diffraction (XRD) Service of the ICTJA-CSIC is an analytical
facility focused on the qualitative and quantitative characterization of
the crystalline phases of materials. The XRD Service, with more than 30
years of experience in the field, offers support to ICTJA researchers
and also to external users from public and private universities and
companies worldwide.

One of the main objectives of the XRD Service at ICTJA is to support the
ongoing investigations carried out by ICTJA researchers and
collaborators on Earth Sciences topics, including studies of
volcanology, petrology and sedimentology. The XRD Service offers also
support to external researchers working in geology, materials science,
environment, chemistry, pharmacy, archaeology, etc. A large number of
companies and organizations from the public or private sectors make use
of the XRD Service at ICTJA-CSIC for their industrial applications,
quality control, environmental studies, forensics, etc.

Our lab also performs in-situ elemental analyses, using a portable
(handheld) X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometer. This equipment is
ideally suited for field work, as it provides fast geochemical
information that can be later complemented with more accurate laboratory
measurements. This equipment is ideal to investigate cultural heritage
materials and for a range of industrial applications.

This is a list of analytical services provided by the lab:

\- Identification and semi-quantification of crystalline phases by
powder XRD

\- Crystal-quality assessment, composition determination and
microstructural analyses

\- Application of the Rietveld method for profile adjustment, structure
refinement and quantitative phase analyses

\- Investigation of small or inhomogeneous samples with
micro-diffraction

\- Determination of crystalline structures

\- In-situ XRF measurements for prospective geology, sedimentology and
cultural heritage studies
