**Laboratory of Geochemistry labGEOTOP (CSIC-ICTJA, Spain)**

The labGEOTOP Service, Laboratory of Elemental and Isotopic Geochemistry
for Petrological Applications, carry out multi-disciplinary research in
Solid Earth Sciences using an established core of world class equipment
and laboratories, and expertise in the technical and applied aspects of
their use. The service plays a key role in catalyzing leading edge
cross-disciplinary research within the CSIC and into Spain. The
labGEOTOP service provides a central mass of equipment that enables
significant scientific collaboration on a regional, national and
international scale. We undertake a wide variety of analytical work for
scientific institutions and industry. The labGEOTOP offer elemental and
isotopic analysis of solids and liquids covering the range of elements
determined by high resolution-inductively coupled plasma-mass
spectrometry.

The Service focuses on the analytical needs of R & D projects on:

\- Compositional structure and evolution of Earth's mantle: mantle
geochemistry mainly through the open window of the volcanic rocks;
origin of mantle plumes.

\- Compositional structure and evolution of the lithosphere: geochemical
processes at the margins of tectonic plates.

\- Geochemical evolution of magmatic and metamorphic processes.

\- Sedimentary geology and paleoclimate reconstruction: geochronology
and processes related to climate change.

\- Volcanism: temporal evolution of pre- and syn-eruptive magmatic
processes: geochemical flows related to volcanic activity.

\- Experimental petrology and mineralogy.

The analytical services provided by the LabGEOTOP go beyond the ICTJA
needs and represent a significant breakthrough in the analytical
services required by the Spanish and international scientific community
on element and isotope geochemistry for process modelling in both whole
rock and high resolution single mineral analysis.

Please find further information here:
http://www.ictja.csic.es/index.php/services-and-facilities/labgeotop-geochemistry
