**Andalchron (CSIC-IACT, Spain)**

Andalchron is a platform of advanced analytical services in petrology,
geochemistry, and geochronology including:

• The advanced petrological, microstructural, and chemical
characterization of geological materials —including automatic particle
characterization— by electron microscopy, micro-Raman, and micro-FTIR.

• In situ U-Th-Pb geochronology by LA-ICP-MS of accessory minerals
(zircon, monazite, rutile, titanite, etc.) in petrographic thin sections
and mounts of mineral separates.

• In situ analysis and imaging of trace elements of minerals in
petrographic thin sections and mounts by LA-ICP-MS.

• Analysis of radiogenic isotopes (Sr-Nd-Pb-Hf) in geological materials
by MC-ICP-MS.

The instruments available for microstructural characterization includes
EDS-EBSD-CL-BSE Scanning Electron Microscope, and micro-Raman and
micro-FTIR microscopes. For geochemical and geochronological services,
Andalchron is equipped with an Agilent 8800 ICP-MS/MS linked to a CETAC
G2 Analyte 193 laser ablation system with double-cup ablation cell. A
MC-ICP-MS for the analysis of radiogenic (Sr-Nd-Pb-Hf) and
non-conventional stable isotopes will be installed in 2019.

Andalchron also hosts a suite of metal-free clean laboratories for the
preparation of geological samples for isotope geochemistry and trace
element analyses –class 100–10000 laboratory spaces— including a 95
m<sup>2</sup> ultra-clean lab with full fume cupboards and six
metal-free class 100 laminar flow clean cabinets for the chromatographic
extraction, purification of chemical elements before isotopic
measurements by MC-ICP-MS, and distillation of acids. Andalchron also
hosts laboratories equipped perchloric-acid hood for ultra-clean acid
digestion of geological materials.

Andalchron is located in the Andalusian Institute of Earth Science
(CSIC-IACT, Granada, Spain) and managed by the Petrology and
Geochemistry department.

For further information, contact the laboratory or visit the Andalchron
webpage (www.andalchron.eu).
