**Electron Microprobe, XRD, FTIR and XRF (FCUL, Portugal)**

Many geological phenomena are underlain by mineral reactions and
transformations occurring within the individual mineral grains. To study
such phenomena, minerals must be observed at all pertinent scales, from
the whole crystal overall structure (defining the mineral identity) to
their local chemical composition (complementing the structural
identification), to zonation patterns and local structure observable by
spectroscopic and electron microscopy techniques.

Our laboratory, which is simultaneously part of the Department of
Geology of the Faculty of Sciences and of IDL – Instituto Dom Luiz (the
overall research structure of the Faculty), is a member of the C4G
Consortium (Collaboratory for Geosciences – the national research
infrastructure for Geosciences) and is also a member of the European
Plate Observing System (EPOS).

This makes our laboratory a key stone in all work performed at the
University of Lisbon and its research partners, involving mineral
science, because we can integrate all the observation scales referred to
above. Our participation in the project NewOreS (ERA-MIN/0001/2014) can
be cited as an example of the research done in our facilities: in it, a
global mineralogical study of the Panasqueira tungsten deposit was
performed at an unprecedented detail, and resulted in thoroughly new
insights pertaining to the evolution of this important orebody, due to
the determination, hitherto unachievable, of the spatial distribution of
each mineral phase and to the recognition of their chemical signatures
(mainly born by minor and trace elements) in each spatial sector of the
mine and of their evolution in time.

Our facilities comprise several components:

1. A microprobe laboratory, where quantitative analyses, qualitative
analyses, X-ray maps and BSE images of polished surfaces can be
performed. Quantitative data are obtained with high precision and
accuracy, due to the application of an unpublished algorithm to the
standardization procedures of the instrument, which minimizes
uncontrolled factors affecting the usual standardization procedures. In
addition, special in-house software can be used to automatically reduce
large amounts of analytical data.

2. An XRF laboratory, where whole rock and mineral separate analyses can
be performed with high sensitivity. Further notice on this will be
available after completion of the present equipment replacement event.

3. An XRD laboratory, able to record difractograms with high signal to
noise ratios, even from very low mass samples.

4. An FTIR laboratory for spectroscopic investigation of minerals in
transmission mode.

Further information can be obtained with the laboratory contact persons.
