**Geochronology and Isotope Geochemistry (Universidad Complutense de
Madrid (UCM), Spain**)

The Geochronology and Isotope Geochemistry Service is a research support
laboratory in the Complutense University of Madrid which provides
radiogenic isotopic analyses to the scientist community. The laboratory
is dedicated to isotope ratio analysis by thermal ionization mass
spectrometry in well-known radioactive systems for geological
investigation (Rb-Sr, Sm-Nd and common-Pb). These analyses are carried
out on a variety of materials (water, soil, fossils, minerals and rocks)
and the results can be applied to both obtaining absolute ages
(geochronology) and the study of geological processes (isotopic
geochemistry). Dating rocks and minerals gives us the age of geological
processes occurring in the Earthâ€™s lithosphere. The isotopic composition
is also a tracer for the origin of magmas and fluids involved in crustal
processes (formation of mineral deposits, sedimentary processes and
geochemistry of surface waters).

Geological Sciences is the most important application, where the
radiogenic isotopes area really helpful tool in all areas (geochemistry,
petrology, stratigraphy, economic geology and hydrogeology). Some of the
other main fields are Environment and Archaeology. Radiogenic
systematics can address many issues: eg, processes forming mineral
deposits, petrogenesis of igneous rocks, geochemistry and evolution of
the lithosphere, dating of metamorphic processes and evolution of
orogens, isotopic geochemistry of surface waters, chronostratigraphy,
paleoclimatology in marine carbonates, diagenetic processes, analysis of
sediment provenance and palaeogeography.

The laboratory consists of three units:

1. TIMS room: this contains two thermal ionization mass spectrometers: a
VG Sector 54 and an IsotopX-Phoenix. Both spectrometers are fully
automated multicollector that perform analyses of Rb-Sr, Sm-Nd and
common-Pb isotope compositions.

2. Ultraclean room (ISO-7): sample evaporation and chromatography
processing of small samples are carried out here.

3. Sample preparation room: due to their susceptibility to
contamination, samples are weighed and dissolved in a fully equipped
clean space, where we also wash apparatus, prior to transfer to the
ultraclean room.

The Geochronology and Isotope Geochemistry Service provides support for
programs of pure and applied research projects in Complutense University
and other universities, scientific institutions, and mining or oil
companies all over the world.

Please find further information here:

https://www.ucm.es/geocronologia

https://www.ucm.es/isotope/
