The IBERSIMS Laboratory (CIC-UGR) hosts a Sensitive High Resolution Ion
Microprobe (SHRIMP), a Scanning Electron Microscope and a facility for
sample preparation. The laboratory is mainly devoted to zircon U-Pb
geochronology and oxygen isotope analysis. We also have implemented
multicollector Pb isotope analyses in feldspars. Currently we are
implementing Mg isotope analyses in silicates.

The IBERSIMS laboratory is open to all researchers. The procedure is as
follows: Once contacted the IBERSIMS staff (ibersims@ugr.es), the
researchers send their zircon concentrates. These are checked by us to
ensure they contain enough zircon grains for the intended purposes; if
not, they are returned to the user. If the concentrate is OK, we prepare
a megamount, suitable for both, U-Pb and Oxygen isotope analyses. The
megamount is then documented using optical microscopy (reflected and
transmitted light) and SEM cathodoluminescence imaging. The images
documenting each sample are then sent to the user for her/him to select
the spots to be analyzed. Once the marked images are returned to the
lab, the mount is analyzed by the lab staff following the user
instructions. No physical presence of the user is required.

Once the mount is analyzed, the staff reduce the data and calculate all
ages and isotope ratios, sending to the user a table with all results as
well as the pictures of each analyzed spot made by the SHRIMP during the
analyses. The data provided so can be used directly on ISOPLOT or
similar software.

The laboratory staff do not work on a collaborative basis, neither make
any geological interpretation of the data. This is the sole
responsibility of the users. Information about the laboratory prices and
other formalities can be found in:

https://cic.ugr.es/servicios-y-unidades/ficha.php?codServicio=1000&unidad=78
