**Laboratorios Analíticos de Geoquímica (Universidad de Oviedo, Spain)**

In this lab facility, we work with both natural and synthetic solid
samples, performing structural characterization and mineralogical and
chemical analyses. In order to achieve any user’s demand, the technical
staff can help to adjust the equipment for any analytical determination
that may be out of the ordinary lab routine.

*Electron microprobe analyses:*

This facility was establish in 1987. Since then, with different CAMECA
apparatus the facility offers the experience of the lab staff to satisfy
the analytical needs suggested by the user. The analyses are qualitative
and quantitative chemical analyses at micrometric scale in solid
pre-polished samples. The analyses is based on the excitation by an
electron beam of the polished surface. Electrons are accelerate between
15 and 35 kv and the beam is focused on a 1 to 2 micron size spot. The
characteristic X –rays generated on the sample are detected by
wavelength dispersive spectrometers (WDS).

Among the most common tasks in this facility are:

\- Chemical qualitative and quantitative analyses of minerals

\- Compositional variation studies

\- Homogeneity assessments at microscale

\- Quality control of glass and ceramic material

\- Semiconductor and multilayer materials analyses

\- Determination and natural element distribution on biological
materials

\- REE, Th, U and Pb determination in monazite and zircon

*Spectroscopy and X ray diffraction:*

The facility takes in the chemical and mineralogical analysis of any
solid: rock, soil, cement, ceramic, glass, metal alloy, environmental
filters, etc.

\- X -ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF):

The main goal is the qualitative and quantitative chemical analyses of
the elements, including fluoride (F) and Uranium (U). The quantitative
analyses has standard calibration for geological samples and related
materials, with international reference standards. The major elements
that can be determined are (in oxides): Al<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub>,
P<sub>2</sub>O<sub>5</sub>, K<sub>2</sub>O, CaO, SiO<sub>2</sub>,
TiO<sub>2</sub>, MnO<sub>2</sub>, Fe<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub>, MgO,
Na<sub>2</sub>O, and as trace elements: V, Cr, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Ba, Nb,
Rb, Sr, Y, Zr, U, Th, Pb, S.

To complement the quantitative determinations, the software “UNIQUANT”,
by Omega Data System, offers semi-quantitative analyses of any kind of
samples.

Routine analyses are made on solid samples that are prepared for its
analyses by cold pressing (trace elements and semi-quantitative
analyses) or by melting into beads (major elements).

\- Atomic absorption spectrophotometry (AAS):

This spectroscopy method is used in this facility to accomplish the
analyses of liquids or for the systematic determination of certain
elements.

\- X-ray diffraction (XRD):

This technique is used for the determination of structural
characterization and the identification of crystalline phases, in both,
natural and synthetic samples. X-ray reflectometry and grazing incidence
on thin films can also be applied. The analyses can be performed on
samples of a wide variety of size and amount, from few milligrams in
case of powder samples, up to several centimeters in blocks, using a
multipurpose platform. Two different software from PANalytical (Spectris
Group) are available: X’Pert Datacollector, for data control and
collection, and X’Pert HighScore for phase identification and comparison
with PDF-2 database. The reference file used is JCPDS from the
International Centre for Diffraction Data, using PDF-1 and PDF-2 files.
