**New HPT lab facilities website: hierarchical structure and text**

HPT lab
=======

The HPT or High Pressure and Temperature Laboratory at Utrecht
University is one of the largest and best-known university laboratories
for rock and fault mechanics research at elevated pressures and
temperatures in Europe. It is run by the [Experimental Rock Deformation
Group](https://www.uu.nl/en/research/department-of-earth-sciences/experimental-rock-deformation),
within the Department of Earth Sciences, led by Prof. C.J. Spiers and
colleagues Prof. J.H.P. de Bresser, Dr. C.J. Peach, Dr. A.R. Niemeijer
and Dr. S.J.T. Hangx. From around January 2019, the HPT Lab will be
located at a new site on the UU campus, within the newly built Earth
Simulation Laboratory (ESL) complex.

The Experimental Rock Deformation Group, also known simply as the HPT
Lab, specializes in research on the mechanical behaviour and transport
properties of Earth materials at conditions ranging from the upper crust
to upper mantle, with a focus on the effects of fluid-rock interaction.
The HPT laboratory is equipped with a wide variety of facilities for
addressing these topics and is supported by a team of three dedicated
technicians.

Equipment available ranges from apparatus for deformation and fault
friction/rheology studies at pressures and temperatures up to 600 MPa
and 1200 °C, to equipment for permeametry and impedance measurement, as
well as high temperature furnaces and apparatus for thermal,
microstructural and IR analysis. Transnational access to the HPT lab
facilities is available in the framework of [EPOS TCS Multi-scale
laboratories](https://www.epos-ip.org/tcs/multi-scale-laboratories/data-services/transnational-access-tna).

The main facilities are summarized below.

Deformation apparatus for axisymmetric compression and direct shear (friction) experiments 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Triaxial compression apparatus with dilatometry and permeametry plus direct shear option (Heard apparatus)

This apparatus consists of an externally heated, conventional triaxial
compressive testing machine, with silicone oil as the confining medium,
linked to logging and several pressure control systems. Key features of
the apparatus are a main pressure vessel, containing the sample, a
linked auxiliary pressure vessel, and a load transmitting yoke/piston
assembly driven by a motor/gearbox/ball-screw system. The set-up is
equipped with a pore fluid pressure control system plus sample
dilatometry and permeametry systems (gas, transient step and
liquid-steady state flow-through capabilities). Confining and pore fluid
pressure are controlled using ISCO 65D servo-controlled pumps.

The Heard triaxial apparatus is suited for axisymmetric compression
testing of cylindrical samples at confining pressures up to 100 MPa, and
temperatures up to 400 °C, either at constant stress (creep tests) or
constant strain rate (10<sup>-4</sup>-10<sup>-7</sup> s<sup>-1</sup>).
In addition, it is possible to perform stress stepping and relaxation
tests, as well as strain rate stepping tests. This machine has been used
to study subsurface CO2 mineralisation and fault rock permeability. The
Heard apparatus can be used for direct shear friction experiments as
well, making use of a two-component direct shear assembly. The direct
shear assembly consists of two L-shaped forcing pistons, sandwiching a
gouge layer of dimensions 47x35 mm and 1-2.5 mm thickness in between.
Both constant strain rate and strain rate stepping tests can be carried
out in the direct shear configuration (same conditions as for
axisymmetric compression testing), with the purpose of measuring the
frictional resistance and the time- and velocity-dependence of friction.

### Triaxial compression apparatus with pore fluid pressure control, pore volumometry and direct shear option (Shuttle vessel)

This internally heated, 100 MPa confining pressure vessel is mounted on
a standard Instron 1362 loading frame with a servo-controlled
positioning system. This machine can be used to deform cylindrical
samples at a constant piston velocity, ranging from 10<sup>-7</sup> to
10<sup>-2</sup> m/s. The displacement is measured outside the vessel
using a (Instron standard) linear variable differential transformer
(LVDT), with 2 μm resolution. The apparatus is equipped with two
(internally and externally located) load cells, each of 100 kN capacity.
The confinement on jacketed samples is done by silicone oil, with the
pressure being controlled by a servo pump, which also serves as
dilatometer to carefully monitor the compaction/dilation of the sample
under study. It is also facilitated with an internal heating furnace to
locally heat up the sample, up to a maximum temperature of 150 °C.
Recently, a high-resolution stress-relaxation method was developed for
simulating rheology at in-situ conditions (strain rates down to
10<sup>-9</sup> s<sup>-1</sup>). Like the **<span
class="underline">Heard apparatus</span>**, the Shuttle vessel can also
be used for direct shear friction experiments, by installing a sample
assembly consisting of two L-shaped forcing pistons, sandwiching a gouge
layer of dimensions 47x35 mm and 1-2.5 mm thickness in between.

### High precision triaxial compression apparatus with pore fluid plus full axial and radial servo control (NAM Machine)

Externally heated, 120 MPa oil pressure medium, servo controlled
triaxial deformation apparatus with 200kN axial load capability. Using
an internal axial force gauge with low pressure sensitivity, this
machine features programmable pore fluid and confining fluid pressure
feedback control of ISCO 65D syringe pumps to allow high precision,
constant radial strain deformation, to failure, of jacketed 50 mm long
cylindrical x 25 mm diameter, rock samples at temperatures up to 150 °C.
Unique design with drive mechanics within the pressure vessel to
eliminate control hysteresis from seal friction.  Controlled loading is
possible via a programmable motor drive subsystem with an automatic gear
changer. The overall control system developed by UU using LabView links
all features of deformation apparatus. The machine and system
development is funded by NAM.

### Gas medium, high precision servo-controlled triaxial testing machine (gas apparatus, 600 MPa, 1200 °C) 

This internally heated machine can generate pressures of up to 600 MPa
and temperatures of up to 1200 °C. Additional differential loading may
be applied via an Instron loading frame, to deform materials under lower
crustal to upper mantle conditions. Typical applications involve studies
of rock rheology and deformation mechanisms at high pressure and
temperatures. Recently, the gas apparatus has been used to constrain the
strain-dependent rheological behaviour of the lithosphere.

Rotary shear deformation/friction facilities
--------------------------------------------

### High PT hydrothermal rotary shear apparatus 

This machine is located in an Instron 1362 testing machine for normal
stress control. The ring shear machine can be used for shear experiments
with a temperature up to about 700 °C, normal stresses up to 300 MPa,
shear velocities in the range from 3 nm/s up to 0.3 mm/s, a pore fluid
pressure up to 200 MPa and ultrahigh shear strains beyond 100.
Currently, this machine is used for the research projects described
under fault mechanics.

### Room T low-medium velocity rotary shear apparatus with AE capabilities

The apparatus is housed inside a 100 kN capacity Instron 8862 testing
machine equipped with a servo-controlled electromechanical actuator that
may be operated either in position control or in load control mode. A
Parker MH205 motor provides rotary motion to the base plate via a 1:160
harmonic drive gearbox, allowing a maximum rotation rate of 12.5 rpm.
Using the motor’s onboard servo-controller, it is possible to control
either the rotation rate (and thus shear displacement) or the torque
(and thus the shear stress). The base plate is equipped with two angular
potentiometers that measure its rotation and is capable of housing
samples or pistons of up to 100 mm in diameter. The exact possible range
of normal stress and sliding velocities depends on the sample size but
are in general between 0.5-40 MPa and 0.01 to 50 mm/s. Some piston sets
allow the use of a pressurized pore fluid. A dedicated piston set is
equipped with 8 holes on both sides that house AE sensors which are
capable of registering acoustic emissions generated during laboratory
earthquakes (“stick-slips”). The apparatus has no heating capabilities.

Uniaxial compaction (oedometer) and sorption/dilatometry facilities
-------------------------------------------------------------------

### Uniaxial (oedometer) compaction cell with pore fluid pressure control (Monel vessel)

This cell is located in an Instron 8862 loading frame. The compaction
cell is equipped with an internal load cell (max. axial load 100 kN) and
an acoustic emission sensor. Fluids can be introduced into the sample
using an ISCO 65D syringe pump (vessel can accommodate fluid pressures
of up to 137.9 MPa). Temperature (range up to 100 °C, if the internal
load cell is used) is controlled using an external furnace. This cell is
primarily used to investigate the effect of fluid chemistry on the
compaction of various earth materials, including coals, shales, various
evaporite minerals, sands and sandstones.

### Uniaxial (oedometer) compaction cell with flow-through capabilities (Remanit vessel)

An Instron 8562 servo-controlled loading frame, furnished with a 100 kN
load cell, is coupled with a Remanit compaction vessel in which the
temperature (up to 150 °C) and fluid pressure (up to 20 MPa) are
precisely controlled. This oedometer-type testing system is further
equipped with ISCO 65D syringe pumps and instrumentation to facilitate
concurrent mechanical testing and reactive flow-through permeametry. The
setup is mainly used to investigate the mechanical response of earth
materials undergoing any physical-chemical reactions with reservoir
fluids under in-situ hydro-thermo-mechanical conditions. Examples
include measuring the swelling stress developed in shale and coal due to
CO<sub>2</sub>/CH<sub>4</sub> adsorption, which is of great importance
for CO<sub>2</sub> sequestration and enhanced shale gas and coal bed
methane recovery, and studying potential force of crystallization
development in mineral reactions such as metal oxide hydration and
peridotite carbonation.

### 100 MPa sorption dilatometer (eddy current dilatometer)

To measure dimensional changes of mm-sized, cylindrical samples, we have
a purpose-built dilatometer consisting of a high-pressure, eddy current
sensor, housed in a Remanit stainless steel pressure vessel (inner
diameter of 20 mm). Fluid pressures of up to 100 MPa can be introduced
to the sample. The assembly allows for measurement of axial expansion or
contraction of the sample upon exposure to fluid. The entire set-up can
be submerged in a thermobath, to achieve a constant experimental
temperature.

### 3D Dilatometer

This setup consists of three high resolution (~25 nm) eddy current
sensors, which are assembled in orthogonal directions, sealed in a glass
chamber. With this setup one can measure sorption/desorption induced
swelling/shrinkage of tiny cubic samples (&lt;15 mm) exposed to
low-pressure gas (e.g. water vapour) environments.

Permeametry and conductivity apparatus
--------------------------------------

### Transient step gas permeameter

Permeabilities of cores (diameters of 25mm and 35 mm) and powders can be
measured in the lab using the pressure transient pulse decay method.
This apparatus is suitable for number of different gasses (Argon,
Helium, CO<sub>2</sub> and methane) and can be used over a wide range of
confining pressures. The transient step gas permeameter can also be used
in conjunction with the **<span class="underline">Heard
apparatus</span>**, to measure the permeability of samples deformed by
triaxial compressive loading.

### Contact resistivity cell (Solartron 1206A, Solartron 1296A dielectric interface)

This cell can be used at (approximately) room temperature and under
atmospheric pressure conditions to measure the electric resistivity of a
pressure dissolving, annular contact between a glass lens and a salt
crystal. At the same time, the growing contact can be directly observed
through the glass lens. This cell has been used for example in the
investigation of the structural and diffusional properties of grain
boundaries under stress.

### Pressurised conductivity cell

This cell is submerged in an oil bath and the temperature may be
controlled to approximately 0.1 °C. Impedance spectroscopy with this
cell can be done by use of a Solartron 1260A frequency response analyzer
and 1296 dielectric interface. This cell is used for impedance
spectroscopy on loaded powders with pore fluid and has recently been
used on coal samples.

Auxiliary facilities
--------------------

-   Vertical Tube furnace with controlled atmosphere

-   Nabertherm Superkanthal 1600 °C furnace

-   Impedance Spectroscopy Solartron 1260

-   Lab presses suitable for pressing material under loads up to 400 kN

-   Du Pont 1090 DTA/TGA Thermal Analyser

-   Malvern Instruments Mastersizer S long bed laser diffraction
    particle size analyser

-   JASCO 620 infrared/optical microscope with FTIR microanalysis system

-   Leica DMRX light optical polarization microscope with image analysis
    QWIN Pro
