The interpretation of geophysical results in terms of nature and
structure of the Earth crust at depth requires experimental
determination of the physical properties of rocks, under controlled
conditions of Pressure/pore pressure, temperature and fluid content.
Several parameters affect the physical properties of rocks, some of
which are intrinsic (e.g., rock fabric, mineralogy, micro-fracturing)
and some are extrinsic (pressure, temperature and pore fluid pressure).
On the geological in situ scale there is no direct correlation between
the lithology and seismic parameters. Therefore the interpretation of
seismic structures is not unique. A better determination of the effects
of pore pressure, confining pressure and temperature on the physical
properties of rocks is required for an improved geophysical
interpretation of crustal, viz. lithospheric structures.

The Rock Deformation Laboratory (RDL) at ETH Zurich conducts research on
the mechanical behavior and transport properties of Earth materials at
conditions pertaining to the Earth's crust and upper mantle. This is
accomplished by means of experimental research coupled with
microstructural studies of the micro-scale processes, and modelling of
these processes. The RDL is working on a range of problems, including
rock deformation, rock physics, elastic wave properties of rocks,
volcano-tectonics, coupled thermo-hydro mechanical process in earth
crust and deep reservoir characterization.

We are a member of the European Plate Observing System (EPOS), of the
Swiss Competence Center for Energy Research Supply of Electricity
(SCCER-SoE); we are active partners in projects of the International
Continental Drilling Project and of the European Program on Accelerating
CCS Technologies (ACT); we recently joined the European Carbon Dioxide
Capture and Storage Laboratories (ECCSEL).

Our lab facility consists of four main components:

1.  High-pressure high-temperature triaxial cell aimed at performing
    dynamic experiments (i.e., pure shear or simple shear deformation)at
    confining pressures of up to 500 MPa and 1300 째C. The vessel is
    additionally fitted for the measurements of fluid permeability in
    rocks.

2.  High-pressure high-temperature triaxial cell aimed at investigating
    the seismic properties of rocks by pulse transmission technique, and
    allowing the measurements of P and S elastic wave velocity,
    anisotropy and birefringence to high confining pressures and to
    temperatures to approximately 1300 째C

3.  Hydrostatic pressure vessel (oil confining medium), allowing P and S
    seismic velocities measurements, up to 400 MPa and 150째C.

4.  Hydrostatic pressure vessel for measuring fluid permeability via the
    transient step technique. The rig is equipped with a furnace that
    can heat the assembly up to 100 째C. Moreover it is he possible to
    inject gases in different states (i.e., gaseous or supercritical),
    for example in applications relating to carbon sequestration.

Further information are at:

http://www.rockdeformation.ethz.ch/
