**HP-HT Laboratory of Experimental Volcanology and Geophysics (INGV,
Italy)**

The High Pressure-High Temperature Laboratory of the Istituto Nazionale
di Geofisica e Vulcanologia of Rome (hereafter HPHT Lab) is a
multidisciplinary facility originally founded in 2002. The HPHT Lab
includes three areas of investigation: 1) experimental testing of
natural and synthetic materials; 2) microanalytical and physical
analyses; 3) analog experiments. Volcanology, petrology, mineralogy,
seismology, and rock physics are the main, broad areas of research at
the HPHT Lab.

Concerning the experimental investigations, research in magma evolution
and rheology, and on mantle petrology are carried out with high-pressure
and high-temperature apparatuses, including furnaces, piston-cylinder,
and multi-anvil devices, covering conditions from surface eruption of
magma to middle mantle. The frictional properties of faults and rocks
are investigated under a wide range of slip rates and dynamics and under
variable boundary conditions using unique rotary shear apparatus and
large-scale bi-axial press. In addition, rock physics/mechanics studies,
from rock permeability to fracturing and degassing can also be
investigated with the above apparatuses and with more classical devices.

The analytical facilities include a Field-Emission Scanning Electron
Microscope and an Electron Micro Probe Analyzer specifically tuned for
natural rock analyses. Accessory to these are an helium pycnometer,
particle size analyzer, sieves, and other basic instruments.

The analog investigations are carried out in a specific area where
ad-hoc, temporary set-ups are developed. Analog materials are
characterized using a rheometer, and the experiments are recorded and
analyzed using a range of visual documentations, spanning from
time-lapse cameras to high-definition and high-speed camcorders. The
analog laboratory focuses mostly on explosive volcanism and the related
products and processes, including the formation and release of Taylor
bubbles, pyroclast ejection during supersonic eruptions, and the
sedimentation and aggregation of volcanic ash particles.

The HPHT Lab also hosts and develops new systems for the in-situ study
of explosive volcanic eruptions by combining high-speed, high-definition
imaging in the visible and thermal infrared wavelengths with acoustic
recording. Investigated processes cover the ejection of volcanic ash and
bombs, their settling and potential hazard, the sources of volcanic
sound, and shifting styles of explosive volcanic activity. The sharing
of facilities and working space in between researchers with such a broad
variety of backgrounds is a key component of the HPHT Lab, eventually
leading to interdisciplinary exchange, facilitating the development of
new projects, and ultimately promoting a stimulating research
environment.
