ISTerre (Insitut des Sciences de la Terre - Institute of Earth Science)
brings together all the researchers in Earth Sciences of the academy of
Grenoble, positioning today as a leader in Earth Sciences in France and
one of the most important in Europe.

ISTerre, gathering nearly 300 people into 10 research teams, is under
the authority of: \[1\] University of Grenoble Alpes (UGA), Grenoble
\[2\] National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS) \[3\] University of
Savoie Mont Blanc (USMB), Chambéry \[4\] Research Institute for
Development (IRD) \[5\] Institut Français des Sciences et Technologies
des Transports, de l'Aménagement et des Réseaux (IFSTTAR). This unit is
part of the Observatoire des sciences de l'univers de Grenoble (OSUG)
and the PAGE Pole of Research of the UGA. It provides solid Earth
observation missions, hosts and maintains national parks of geophysical
instruments, as well as a data center.

The various research teams of ISTerre study the Earth with the various
and complementary approaches of geology, chemistry or physics, with a
particular focus on the coupling between observations of natural
objects, experimentation and modelling of associated complex processes.

3 main scientific priorities:

1.  Understanding earthquakes, landslides, volcanic eruptions and
    Earth’s magnetic field

Long-term observations and analyses based on experimental, numerical and
field data with interpretation. Better understanding leads to better
prediction, mitigation and remediation. This research is promoted at
scientific and societal levels.

1.  What is shaping the Earth?

Topography is the expression of geodynamics related to fault activities,
as well as processes involving erosion and deposition (internal and
external constraints).To be understood, these processes need to be
observed, imaged and modeled.

1.  How do rocks change as a function of natural and human constraints?

Mineralogical and geochemical proxies are used to better quantify and
model time and space variations of rock evolution and soil
transformation under natural conditions (pressure, temperature,
deformation, fluid migration) or anthropic influences (pollutions,
mineral/oil&gas extraction) through laboratory experiments,
high-resolution data acquisition and modeling.

Our research activities and programs are continuing within this new
framework. Whether they are based in Grenoble, Chambéry, Lima or Beirut,
we are confident that ISTerre will provide the means to its 250 members
to promote innovative research in Earth Sciences.
