**Experimental rock deformation/HPT-Lab (Utrecht University, The
Netherlands)**

The HPT or High Pressure and Temperature Laboratory at Utrecht
University is one of the largest and best-known university laboratories
for rock and fault mechanics research at elevated pressures and
temperatures in Europe. It is run by the Experimental Rock Deformation
Group, within the Department of Earth Sciences, led by Prof. C.J. Spiers
and colleagues Prof. J.H.P. de Bresser, Dr. C.J. Peach, Dr. A.R.
Niemeijer and Dr. S.J.T. Hangx. From around January 2019, the HPT Lab
will be located at a new site on the UU campus, within the newly built
Earth Simulation Laboratory (ESL) complex.

The Experimental Rock Deformation Group, also known simply as the HPT
Lab, specializes in research on the mechanical behaviour and transport
properties of Earth materials at conditions ranging from the upper crust
to upper mantle, with a focus on the effects of fluid-rock interaction.
The HPT laboratory is equipped with a wide variety of facilities for
addressing these topics and is supported by a team of three dedicated
technicians.

Equipment available ranges from apparatus for deformation and fault
friction/rheology studies at pressures and temperatures up to 600 MPa
and 1200 °C, to equipment for permeametry and impedance measurement, as
well as high temperature furnaces and apparatus for thermal,
microstructural and IR analysis. Transnational access to the HPT lab
facilities is available in the framework of EPOS TCS Multi-scale
laboratories.

The main facilities are:

• Deformation apparatus for axisymmetric compression and direct shear
(friction) experiments

• Rotary shear deformation/friction facilities

• Uniaxial compaction (oedometer) and sorption/dilatometry facilities

• Permeametry and conductivity apparatus

Note that the HPT lab is currently moving to a new building. Full access
(via TNA calls) can only be offered from 1 July 2019. Opportunities
before that date will depend on proposals vs circumstances.
