Types of analyses. The experimental technique involves the construction
of analogue physical models at a reduced time and length scale of the
natural geological process (prototype) under study. Although these
models simplify the geometry and rheology, they represent a realistic
dynamic and geometric replica of the prototype. The laboratory is
equipped with a number of apparatuses (operating in both normal and
enhanced gravity) that may simulate the different tangential and
vertical forces acting in nature. Specifically, the apparatuses can
induce deformation in both pure and simple shear conditions, allowing to
investigate a large variety of crustal and lithospheric-scale
experiments in extensional, compressional, or strike slip settings.

Laboratory equipment:

-   1 large-capacity centrifuge PM980R (ALC International) that allows
    the deformation of physical models in an enhanced gravitational
    field, particularly suitable to model the continental extension
    processes.

-   1 pure-simple shear prototype apparatus that allows to vary the
    kinematics imposed to the mobile wall, thereby simulating the
    deformation in different tectonic settings. A special apparatus
    consists of an electrically-controlled piston that injects the
    silicone into the model to reproduce the emplacement of analogue
    magma during deformation.

-   1 pure shear prototype apparatus that allows the unidirectional
    deformation of the model.

-   1 coni-cylindrical viscometer for measuring the viscosity of
    experimental ductile materials.

-   1 apparatus for interferometric analysis of model surface.
    Sequential 3D digital elevation models (DEM) allow to analyze the
    evolution of tectonic structures and associated topographic response
    in great detail.

-   1 laser scanner Optix 400M (3D Digital Corporation) for monitoring
    (in all deformation apparatuses) the evolution of model topography
    through time.

Research activity. The activity of the ‘Tectonic Modelling Laboratory’
aims to investigate geological and tectonic processes occurring in
nature at different scales, from mesoscopic to lithospheric. In
particular, the main research lines address some of the tectonic
processes that are fundamental for the evolution of Earth, particularly:
continental extension, continental collision and development of orogenic
belts, inversion tectonics, emplacement of magma in different geodynamic
settings, and analysis of sedimentary basins. Other studies address
geomorphological processes (e.g., modeling of ice flow and landslide
phenomena) as well as the conservation of cultural heritage (e.g.,
stability analysis of the Michelangelo’s David).
