**Laboratory of Experimental Tectonics (Universitá degli studi "Roma
TRE", Italy)**

The Laboratory of Experimental Tectonics (LET) is hosted at the
Department of Sciences of the Univ. “Roma TRE”. The LET was born on
1994, following the international tradition on experimental modelling
and it has been the first Italian analog laboratory.

The scientific activity of the LET is focused on four main research
themes:

1. crustal deformations (orogenetic and rifting processes);

2. lithospheric deformations (subduction, delamination, post-glacial
rebound);

3. magmatic processes (volcano-tectonics and intrusive processes)

4. rupture and propagation of faults in the crust/lithosphere.

The LET merges methodologic research lines having geodynamic goals and
direct applications to natural hazards.

The study of crustal scale deformations provided insights into the
deformation variability of natural systems as a function of the
brittle-ductile strength of the crust. Innovative models have been setup
building up a thermomechanical prototype.

Lithospheric scale deformations have been studied characterizing the
geometry/kinematics/dynamics of the subduction process during the
journey of the slab into the upper and lower mantle. A parametric
analysis has been dedicated to highlight the role played by
dimension/density/viscosity of lithosphere and mantle in the subduction
process. The LET activity has been distinguished for its studies on the
subduction induced mantle circulation and the dynamic topography
associated to this process.

Magmatic processes have been studied looking at deformations induced by
both magma injection in volcanoes or plutons and the collapse of
volcanic edifices.

The availability of a rheometer allows for the selection and the
rheological characterization of analog materials. In particular, the
“pig skin” gelatin has been used to set-up novel analog models to shed
light on the behavior of the subduction thrust fault and to provide
insights on the triggering of mega-earthquakes.

The recent logistic and structural improvements of the LET and the
development of quantification techniques consolidated the already wide
number of national and international collaborations, increasing their
quality and quantity. The LET is thus a reference analog laboratory in
the scientific community. This is also mirrored by the involvement of
the LET in numerous scientific projects (e.g., PRIN-MIUR, National Civil
Protection, EC, NSF, ESF, EUROHORC) and outreach activities (e.g.,
Committee on Education EGU, Geo&Geo, Discovery’s Science Channel).
Moreover, the LET researchers have been awarded with several prizes
(e.g., EURYI award 2006, Premio Galileo 2010, EGU Stephan Muller medal
2014, Burgen Scholar Award 2009, EGU Outstanding Early Career Scientists
Award 2018, Burov medal 2018, AGU medal 2018) for the high level of
their scientific results
