**TecLab - Tectonic Modelling Laboratory (Utrecht University, The
Netherlands)**

The tectonic modelling laboratory (TecLab) is the main research facility
of the Tectonics research group, and a key infrastructure in the Earth
Simulation Laboratory (ESL) of the Department of Earth Sciences at
Utrecht University (UU). Research conducted in the TecLab aims to
improve our fundamental understanding of the multi-scale (spatial and
temporal) parameters and rock behavior that control the mutual
interaction of deep Earth and surface processes. To pursue this key
objective, research performed in the TecLab is typically integrated with
and strongly tied to field and numerical modelling studies, enabling to
develop novel approaches and methodologies.

This unique integrated modelling approach has established the TecLab as
a renowned tectonic modelling laboratory, also evidenced by the long
term involvement of the TecLab in a wide range of national and
international research projects and programs (e.g. ESF TOPO-EUROPE;
EU-Topomod; EU-Subitop; EU-GEMEX). Moreover, the TecLab is linked also
to the Dutch Research Centre for Integrated Solid Earth Sciences, as
well as to the European Plate Observatory System (EPOS). And at UU the
TecLab facility plays a key role in undergraduate and graduate education
as well as in outreach activities.

In the TecLab, we use "scaled physical analogue models" to better
understand (large scale) deformation processes that occur in the Earthâ€™s
lithosphere in response to plate motions or intra-plate deformation;
examples include the breakup of the Earth's crust and the formation of
sedimentary basins, the formation of mountain ranges or the development
of subduction zones. The spatial scale of applications typically
stretches from reservoir and basin (hundreds of meters to kilometer) to
plate (hundreds of kilometers) scale.

Different to most other analogue modelling laboratories worldwide,
TecLab research strongly focusses on developing novel ideas and
methodologies to address deformation processes on the scale of the
entire lithosphere. The fundamental as well as applied research
performed in the TecLab is relevant not only for research into long and
short term deformation processes, but also for geo-hazards and
geo-resources (e.g. oil & gas, geothermal energy).

In the last 20 years many collaborative tectonic modelling studies in
the TecLab have been applied successfully to a range of natural
laboratories, each characterized by a unique geodynamic setting and
different plate tectonic processes. Examples of such integrated,
process-oriented case studies include the formation of mountain ranges
(e.g. European Alps, the Caucasus, the Pyrenees), the evolution of
sedimentary basin systems (e.g. the Pannonian Basin, the Aegean basins),
the break-up of continents (the East African Rift) and associated
formation of new oceanic basins (the Barents Sea; the South Atlantic).

The TecLab infrastructure includes:

1) devices for determining the physical properties of the analogue
materials (rheometer, Krantz-type shear apparatus, pycnometers etc.)

2) several, differently sized deformation boxes connected to stepping
motors to run the analogue experiments

3) equipment for monitoring and analyzing the experiments. The latter
includes next to standard digital photography and sectioning of the
experiments, novel non-destructive CT and surface scanning techniques to
calculate incremental and finite displacement and strain fields in 3D.

For more information please visit the TecLab website or e-mail the
TecLab: teclab.geo@uu.nl
