**TecLab Bern (Tectonic Modelling Laboratory of the University of
Bern)**

Analogue modelling is a well-established technique to investigate the
evolution of tectonic structures in the Earth's crust and lithosphere.
Scaled analogue models offer the opportunity to determine the relation
between imposed boundary conditions and the resulting structures. The
strength of such models lies in stimulating the conception of testable
hypotheses about the development of tectonic structures in nature.

The Tectonic Laboratory at the University of Bern (TecLab Bern) offers
innovative and state-of-the-art facilities to model and analyse in
detail a large variety of tectonic settings. Analogue models can be
analysed by X-ray computed tomography (XRCT) using a 64-slice Siemens
Somaton Definition AS medical scanner. XRCT is a technique which permits
visualisation of the interior of a model without destroyig it, hence
allowing an in-depth analysis of the 3-D geometry of tmodel structures..
Full 3D imaging of analogue models using XRCT allows the reconstruction
of any desired section, be it horizontal, vertical or oblique and can
provide constraints for seismic analysis of compex tectonic zones where
seismic data are often fragmentary and difficult to interpret.

XRCT analysis of analogue models at regular time intervals makes it
possible to understand the 3D evolution of structures in time (4D). 4D
XRCT data sets obtained from analogue models provide the opportunity to
re-run the experiment on the computer screen and thus represents a
valuable database not only for seismic interpreters but also for
teaching and outreach purposes.

Digital volume correlation (DVC) techniques on XRCT volumetric data can
be used to quantify the 3D spatial and temporal strain patterns inside
analogue models at high resolution. Such strain quantification of
analogue experiments is of great importance when comparing analogue
models with numerical models tudies. We have successfully applied DVC to
models consisting of both brittle and viscous analogue model materials.

The TecLab Bern has several deformation devices, including an innovate
experimental apparatus (whose size is adapted for XRCT analysis) with
computer-controlled stepper motors that permits the combined
displacement of baseplates and sidewalls allowing oblique deformational
movements (oblique extension, oblique shortening). Another device allows
the simulation of extensional rotational movements about a pivoting
axis, and its size also permits analysis by medical XRCT scanning.

Please find further informations, photos and animations here:
http://www.geo.unibe.ch/research/tectonics/laboratories/tectonic\_modelling\_lab/index\_eng.html
