**Laboratorio de Modelización Analógica (Universidad de Zaragoza-IGME)**

**Analogue Modelling Laboratory (Zaragoza University-IGME)**

The Analogue Modelling Laboratory began operation at the *Departamento
de Ciencias de la Tierra* of the University of Zaragoza in 2002. Its
equipment was made possible thanks to the infrastructure project
MECD-AFC2002-579-LD of the Spanish Ministry of Education. There is a
close scientific collaboration with the Zaragoza Unit of the IGME
(Geological and Mining Institute of Spain) since 2009. This laboratory
ensures the realization of analog modelling experimental projects around
the field of Tectonics: brittle and ductile deformation, brittle/ductile
couplings, coupling sedimentation/strain, extensional, compresional,
strike-slip and salt tectonics, transpression and transtension.

**The main lines of research developed are:**

• Influence of mechanical stratigraphy in basin geometry

• Development of rotational and oblique structures

• 3D deformational patterns in complex folds

• Bidirectional extension and relay ramps in extensional tectonics

• Magnetic fabrics analysis in analogue models

**Equipment:** Table and modelling boxes, motors and frequency
controllers**,** cylindrical-rotatory viscometer**,** precision
balance**,** portable thermometer with probe**,** programmable digital
photo camera**,** focus light, heating plate, concrete mixer for sand
dyeing, industrial vacuum cleaner, sieves (500, 400, 300 y 200 mm), test
tubes and graduated glasses (500, 600 y 1000 ml), materials for
modeling: natural rubber, siliceous sands (L-70/80S, LS0103), silicones
(rhodorsil gomme FB), clay, honey, EVA rubber, lead-tetraoxide.

**Permanent researchers**: Teresa Román-Berdiel and Antonio Casas-Sainz
(UZ), Emilio Pueyo and Ruth Soto (IGME).

Please find further information here: [<span
class="underline">https://cienciastierra.unizar.es/laboratorio-de-modelizacion-analogica</span>](https://cienciastierra.unizar.es/laboratorio-de-modelizacion-analogica)

Furthermore, this laboratory is used for teaching purposes both in the
Degree and in the Master's studies in Geology, and for informative
purposes, to bring Structural Geology and Tectonics closer to society.

Please find a video documentary here:

[<span
class="underline">https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mfC9zdjt\_Oo</span>](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mfC9zdjt_Oo)

***“Modelización analógica. La Tierra en pequeño” (Analogue modelling:
visions on a reduced Earth)***
