**Paleomagnetic Laboratory Fort Hoofddijk (Utrecht University, The
Netherlands)**

The research of the Fort Hoofddijk Paleomagnetic Laboratory cover nearly
all fields of paleomagnetism. An important expertise of the research
group is building high resolution and accurate time scales, using
magnetostratigraphy and cyclostratigraphy (and astrochronology), based
on correlation to astronomical solutions of past changes in the Earth’s
orbit and rotation. Another major topic is the acquisition of reliable
and detailed records of the geomagnetic field at all time scales, which
serves to understand the past magnetic field of our planet Earth. This
work includes paleointentsity and paleosecular variation studies – from
recent periods (archaeomagnetism), during periods when the field did not
reverse (superchrons) - to properties of the earliest field more than 3
billions of years ago. This field includes understanding how the ancient
field was acquired in the remanent magnetization in different types of
rocks (rock magnetism). Yet another key interest concerns
geodynamic/tectonic studies, at different spatial and temporal scales
and on several continents, but with an emphasis on the Alpine-Himalayan
mountain belt. This includes the Mediterranean, Paratethys and Himalayan
areas as one of the most active tectonic regions in the world.

The laboratory is featured with spohisticated instruments for detailed
stepwise demagnetization and measurement of the natural remanent
magnetization (NRM) and various laboratory-imparted remanences. All with
the overarching aim to unveil the NRM intricacies for robust geological
and geophysical interpretations. This includes devices for measurement
of the magnetic susceptibility and its anisotropy as well as
instrumentation for measurement of magnetic hysteresis loops and FORC
diagrams. The paleomagnetism group has access to other analytical
facilities of the Department of Earth Sciences.

Please find further information here:

http://www.geo.uu.nl/~forth/
