**Paléomagnétisme LSCE Gif sur Yvette (CNRS-CEA-Versailles St Quentin
University, France)**

The LSCE paleomagnetic group has a 40-year long experience with major
contributions in the past evolution of the Earth magnetic field,
tectonic and geodynamical studies, magma emplacement, present and past
environments. The present research activities mainly aim to reconstruct
(1) climatic changes from the investigation of the sedimentary magnetic
properties, and (2) past variations in the Earth magnetic field, at high
resolution and different time scales.

(1) We investigate the magnetic properties of sediments at orbital to
centennial timescales in various ocean basins (in combination with other
tracers such as particle grain sizes and concentrations of major and
trace elements), in order to characterize past changes in deep ocean
circulation and in continental inputs (related to land precipitation,
erosion, glaciers advances and retreats). Common applications in our
group are the reconstructions of past changes in bottom current
intensities in the subpolar North Atlantic, the Indian Ocean and the
Western Pacific, as well as of in continental precipitations in
monsoonal regions.

In modern environments, we study the physical and chemical properties of
the suspended magnetic fraction in river systems (e.g. in the Seine
river) to characterize the time and spatial distribution of iron oxides
related to the erosion and alteration of parent rocks, metallic
pollution and associated contaminants.

(2) We also reconstruct at high resolution past changes of the
geomagnetic field (direction and intensity) in order to improve our
understanding of the Earth magnetic field, based on both sediment and
lava samples. We focus on secular variation, polarity reversals and
geomagnetic excursions to document the dynamic and morphology of the
Earth magnetic field. We also use past rapid variations in the Earth
magnetic field intensity to improve the chronostratigraphy of climate
archives, which is a major challenge to quantify the phasing between
far-sided climatic variables and thus disentangle climate mechanisms at
the global scale. We provided a unique high-resolution reference record
for the last 80 ka, placed on the very accurate Greenland ice annually
counted time scale.

Paleomagnetic research activities performed at LSCE are developed within
the framework of national and international research programs. They are
based on analytical facilities allowing investigations of magnetic
properties and of all kinds of remanent magnetizations on sediments and
lavas. Instruments were specifically developed for our needs in
continuous and high-resolution measurements of weak magnetizations.

The facilities include:

1.  Cryogenic magnetometers: two of them equipped with high resolution
    pick-up coils and dedicated

2.  to the continuous study of sedimentary sequences, and one is
    equipped with high homogeneity pick up coils for the study of
    discrete samples

3.  Demagnetization devices based on alternating fields (some in-lines
    with the cryogenic magnetometers, other separated for discrete
    samples)

4.  Anhysteretic and isothermal remanence magnetizations acquisition
    both in line with the cryogenic magnetometers and with separated
    devices for discrete samples

5.  Thermal demagnetization in zero field with two Pyrox furnaces

6.  Three furnaces of different capacities for thermoremanent
    magnetization acquisition in air and in Argon

7.  Various instruments for the measurement of the low-field magnetic
    susceptibility (including the continuous scan), its thermal behavior
    and its anisotropy

8.  Magnetic mineralogy using high fields in particular with a Micromag,
    a vibrating field translation balance, a magnetic extraction system

9.  Instruments 1) to 4) are placed in a 30 square-meters three-layers
    (2 in µmetal) shielded room

Further information here:

https://www.lsce.ipsl.fr/en/Phocea/Vie\_des\_labos/Ast/ast\_groupe.php?id\_groupe=78

Analytical platform: http://panoply-geops.lsce.ipsl.fr/index.php/en/
