Interpreting magnetic properties of natural samples is a complex
challenge. In contrast to artificial samples, natural ones consist
almost always of several magnetic mineral species, evidence multimodal
grain size distributions, different shapes and compositions. Measured
bulk magnetic properties represent therefore a mixture of individual
magnetic components, which one aims to decipher and to quantify. Proper
interpretation is therefore only possible by applying a broad spectrum
of experimental techniques requiring an appropriate technology.

We follow this multi-experimental approach on the one hand to
characterize carriers of natural remanent magnetization. This concerns
for instance reliability assessment of palaeointensity determinations
and palaeomagnetic directions, necessary for our research in
magnetostratigraphy, archaeomagnetism and reconstruction of
palaeosecular variation. On the other hand, we exploit this approach for
characterization and interpretation of Quaternary sedimentary sequences,
Devonian marine carbonate platforms and archaeological as well as
polluted environments.

At national level we are tightly linked with the archaeological
community and the Belgian research landscape. At international level we
are networked with communities dedicated to research in magnetic
nanoparticles, standardization of magnetic properties, archaeometry and
palaeomagnetism. We are part of national and European networks such as
for instance national cooperation conventions in archaeology, COST
Actions TD1402, CA17131 and the European Plate Observing System (EPOS).
In 2016, we hosted the 15th Castle Meeting “New Trends on Paleo, Rock
and Environmental Magnetism” in Dinant and organized a pre-meeting short
course for students on rock magnetism.

Our laboratory facility consists of three units:

1.  The sample preparation unit is equipped with necessary devices for
    preparation of archaeological geological, soil samples and
    ferrofluid suspensions including treatments such as chemical
    extractions, hardening, magnetic separation and removal of organic
    matter.

2.  The remanence unit features necessary devices for acquisition,
    demagnetisation and measurement of the most common types of remanent
    magnetization such as anhysteretic, crystallization, isothermal,
    natural, post-depositional and thermo- and viscous remanence. These
    devices are used for archaeomagnetic dating, magnetostratigraphy and
    analysis of remanence carriers.

3.  The characterization unit is endowed with typical instruments for
    field and laboratory measurements of magnetic properties, as well as
    with devices for non-magnetic characterization such as grain
    density, pH and porosity. In addition, a highly sophisticated
    measurement system enables magnetic characterization of samples over
    a wide range of fields and temperatures and at several AC-field
    frequencies.

Please find further information here:

http://dourbes.meteo.be/en/research/environmentalmagnetism
